good morning everyone or good afternoon
or evening wherever you are
this is the soroban design discussion
in which we discuss topics related to
the Stellar protocol and specifically
soroban
and  today we're going to keep talking
and today we're going to keep talking
about State expiration so without
further Ado I'm just going to hand it
over to Garand
yeah so last time we talked about
temporary entries and so today I'd like
to continue that conversation
kind of the two biggest topics last time
were these temporary entries of these
are entries that have some sort of
Lifetime and are automatically deleted
after that lifetime
previously we're talking about well in
this lifetime should be an arbitrary
Ledger and if we should allow users to
Define an arbitrary Ledger or an
arbitrary lifetime or TTL and then the
second issue was whether we should allow
users to extend this TTL and correct me
if I'm wrong but at least my takeaways
from that conversation last week with
that extending TTL was definitely a
required feature and that there seem to
be some confusion around the interface
whereas like the temporary entries how
like this TTL
you know Ledger sort of talk or as
the restorable entries have this  you
the restorable entries have this you
know rent balance  rent fee sort of
know rent balance rent fee sort of
interface and so today I'd like to talk
about addressing those two issues and
then be working the temporary entry
interface to hopefully combine the
interfaces and to have like a unified
front-on storage
and so as far as
ttls that are specific in the arbitrary
ledgers I think we decided to go against
that I think the use case for that was
primarily for security reasons say if
you have like a temporary allowance that
you want to exist for only 10 ledgers no
more no less I've been an exact TTL to
accomplish that I think however from a
protocol standpoint that's probably a
little bit of an over specification to a
specific security use case and also
having those specific ttls  definitely
having those specific ttls definitely
degrades Downstream system performance
when it comes to things like Horizon and
RPC and so I think for that particular
use case it's very easy to implement on
the e-smart contacts themselves just to
include an exploration Ledger and the
strength to actually store then the
entry but as far as like a specific
guaranteed TTL expiration Ledger that
seems to be outside the scope of the
storage protocol
but with that in mind I think it
seemed that  just based on the
seemed that just based on the
community comments that  temporary
community comments that temporary
entries required a lower bound that was
strict
but the upper bound didn't really
matter that much and so and because
the lower ground that is like the
minimum lifetime is kind of what's more
important here what I've tried to do is
to unify the two interfaces and have
both temporary entries and restorable
entries have the same type of fee
structure and have the same type of rent
balance structure and so essentially
what this interface would do is both
temporary entries and restorable entries
you must pay rent now that works from a
user perspective is that whenever you
create either a temporary entry or a
restorable entry you can Define the
starting Lifetime and so what we'll do
is in the SDK will expose these as flags
and so you could have like short medium
and long lifetime or a short lifetime is
very short on the scale of like you know
50 events for less than an hour medium
lifetime is like you know on the scale
of several days less than a week and the
long lifetime is about 30 days and so
this time gives a flexibility for the
temporary entries as to if you have like
Oracle data that's very short-lived you
can use short lifetime or if you have
something longer lived  that you don't
something longer lived that you don't
care if it's still needed and you don't
care if it goes to the archive when it
runs out of rent then you can do the
meat for long term rent
payments now what this does is the short
medium and long term gives you a
stripped lower bound and so we can offer
the guarantee that if the short lifetime
says it'll last 15 minutes that entry
will last at least 15 minutes or you
know The Ledger equivalent now because
the Run feed is variable it's possible
that the entry will live exactly as long
as we guarantee it will or it could also
live longer than that and so I think for
temporary entries if there's a security
use case where you want to expire after
some amount of time
and not a cost saving use case then
that needs to be implemented on the
smart contract side
now in addition to this initial rent
balance that you can specify via these
Flags  temporary entries are identical
Flags temporary entries are identical
to restorable entries with terms of rent
bumps and the rent payment interface
what that means is that temporary
entries receive a small incremental red
bump on every access which means that if
a temporary entry is frequently accessed
then it will live for longer than slower
bound and so if you can imagine like the
most extreme example you could create a
temporary entry with  the minimum you
temporary entry with the minimum you
know balance or the minimum rent balance
of say like 15 minutes worth of rent but
if that ledger for that entry is very
very frequently accessed in those 15
minutes and it could last for hours days
possibly even months and so this is one
of the other side effects of this rent
balance feature but just based on
community feedback it's seen that the
lower bound was important to the upper
bound less so
this also unifies the interfaces
additionally in addition to the
automatic Grant bumps on temporary
entries you can also do manual wrap
bumps on the same way you can storeable
entries so if a user is motivated to
have a specific temporary entry last for
a long time they can pay you the rent
fees and do that manually via an
operation if they want
but now as far as any cost structure
because temporary entries are
self-deliving we want to incentivize
them and so there seem to be issues with
kind of a archivable fee or like a of a
some sort of Base fee for restorable
entries and so I think with this unified
interface since both are subject to rent
both restorable and temporary entries
what makes the most sense is that for
temporary entries to be charged at a
slightly lower rate
so for instance
you know these aren't the real
numbers  but just if a restorable
numbers but just if a restorable
entry would be charged one excellent per
Ledger the exact same size entry that is
a temporary entry would only be charged
0.8 xlm per Ledger or something like
that and so in this way because we
essentially have a lower rent fee or we
can incentivize using temporary entries
and kind of put all as much traffic
towards the temporary entries as
possible and so I think generally
speaking  just you know first thoughts
speaking just you know first thoughts
on this unified interface and having
this sort of like  rent balance
this sort of like rent balance
feature built into the temporary entries
yeah there's one thing that I find a bit
weird about  bumping temporary entries
weird about bumping temporary entries
I feel like the the product story
doesn't really add up in a lot of ways
so let's say for example that
an oracle is creating like a one hour
you know like a price that's like
available for one hour like why should
cons and and from their perspective it
is in fact only relevant for one hour
but now consumers are actually going to
bump that ledger entry to live beyond
its intended lifetime
yes so this is one of the open questions
I wanted to discuss is that for I think
like  if you're going to do like a
like if you're going to do like a
Oracle for instance
where the information is only valid
for five minutes and useless beyond that
then temporary rent bumps don't make
sense
but then there are other use cases I
think someone gave an example like a CK
snark
used to verify some value  that if
used to verify some value that if
you're continually using that CK snark
it does seem advantageous  for that
it does seem advantageous for that
proof information to remain unchain as
long as you're using it and so I guess
the question here is
you know  do we want to have a
you know do we want to have a
universal policy for either temporary
entries are always bumped or never
bumped or who have some sort of
conditional policy like we have an
additional flag
on the temporary entry that says this
entry type is subject to automatic
Bunch or this entry type is not subject
to automatic bumps
you know that provides some
granularity but it may also
you know complicate the interface a
little bit more
yeah I I still didn't quite understand
this example maybe that's because I
haven't attended the previous design
discussion
but I really don't quite understand
why the temperature should be used for
this use case in the first place if you
are interested in certain behavior and
if it is expensive to recreate this
entry from scratch then the question is
why is this not a restorable entry in
the first place and in general in weeks
away you've been describing it would it
be a correct statement to say that
with this proposal temp entries and the
only difference between temp entries and
recoverable entries as well whether they
go to the archive or see tone so
it kind of seems like a bit redundant to
have to
very similar things that have only some
first
maybe we should try to either
consolidate this or have a more
well-defined use cases because like the
reason I was always advocating for no
bumps on the temperatures because they
use skates for them is kind of different
and it's something that you know you
want to persist for a short period of
time and you don't really care about
being kived or pumped and you if you
need more complex behaviors and you
probably are interested in
interested archived and can be
restored yeah
I think they disagree  just because I
I think they disagree just because I
think that there's kind of like two use
cases we're targeting here I think like
in the Oracle case you have very
short-term data like five minutes
that's kind of what we were targeting
the initial temporary entry Proposal
with like a you know details that never
change
but beyond the Oracle use case I
think there is a strong motivation or at
least the network should have a strong
motivation two prioritive times using
storage that's self-deleting
just because the archive is not a
black hole that we can just throw
entries into right like if
you know every single entry type
that's beyond you know the most basic
Oracle data needs to be a restorable
entry that gets to be archived you know
having entries thrown the archive as
soon as fast having them store on The
Ledger but that's still an issue and
still
that you know that will have issues
of scale later on and so I think if we
can do anything to prioritize using data
that doesn't have to be persistently
stored forever and ever we should
definitely do that and so I think in
this particular kind of use cases that
we still offer that very short lifetime
expectation for things like oracles
without like 10 or 15 minute very
cheap very inexpensive entry type but we
also provide flexibility for say an
entry that is used longer term but
that's not sensitive enough to be put in
the archive right and so I think
the archive should only really be
used for entry types that can't be
recreated I think  kind of demome you
recreated I think kind of demome you
said is if an entry type is expensive to
recreate then why not use a restorable
entry we shouldn't prioritize or we
shouldn't incentivize that behavior I
think if an entry is restorable at all
then that should be or is a
non-resortable sorry if an entry type is
recreatable at all even if it's a
expensive Recreation we should do
everything we can perhaps to prioritize
that in the temporary entry space
because having a you know an entry that
is arbitrarily recreatable get deleted
and then get recreated on the network is
significantly healthier for Network
scale than having Visio entry type that
is arbitrarily creatable but for some
cost saving whatever it gets thrown in
the archive I think the archetype should
really only be reserved for security
sensitive things and then for things
like balances that can't be recreating
that you need to have you know a true
definition of
oh but what is your
developer's story for this week how how
do you communicate because like it kind
of sounds nice in theory but not sure
how this can be enforced I don't think
it can be right and there is all Second
Street
well like you cannot make people to
create certain sorts of hinges and this
thing is if  you know if I think my
thing is if you know if I think my
entry and it's kind of important to me
and they want to maybe recover it it'll
it's recoverable entry even so maybe I
shouldn't have
it's not clear how can we communicate
this clearly like our stretch
there is already already pretty
complicated
and also it's really but the
temperature is like the thing is that
automatic bumps do not provide any
guarantees as to how long doses since
these to like you know if you have some
proof or whatever
you know you cannot reasonably predict
that even if someone accesses it it will
pull on the lifetime of the century
enough for it to be useful in other
contexts and
I
I I'm just not sure how
how can he put any
expectations on the temp entry pumps
because well the entry will be gone
sooner or later and it's very hard to
argue that you know fuel exists any
given period of time
beyond the overbound so I I'm just
not sure how would you communicate it
and why users won't just use recoverable
entries
whenever they can
like like in the context of those
oracles I mean I like oracles are
like they're going to refresh the you
know like the the actual entry so I
think it makes total sense to have this
autographed feature like unless you have
like abandoned entries
like an oracle you know that basically
is creating a thing that is only for
valid for like five minutes and then for
the day right and that's it and then you
have to catch it  when you can
have to catch it when you can
and in that situation the contract
the the this Oracle contract
should not it should actually be written
with the like the actual exploration
baked into it like the the pattern that
was you know in the dark at some point
that was like you know you look at the
expiration time and if it's past the
five minutes or whatever you want it to
keep it then you actually delete it
and then you don't have those problems
yeah and  to answer your questions
yeah and to answer your questions
email about why would someone use
temporary is not restorable just cheaper
right because I think you know generally
speaking
you know a efficient market
hypothesis let's say that smart
contracts or sophisticated smart
contracts are actually used
will use the cheapest print as possible
or at least a good developer would and
so I think just by having this financial
incentive for temporary entries we kind
of solve the use case issue and sure if
someone wants to you know just say I
don't want to worry about oh my data is
important I only use restorable entries
that's fine but they have to pay for it
and so I think having that Financial
incentive and trying to de-incentivize
restorable entries because from a
Network Health perspective we want to
de-incentivize
you know restorable entries as much
as possible and so I think having this
more General and unified temporary
storage interface
does that in a much better way than a a
separate TTL based approach would
I'd like to comment on this from the
perspective of developer experience so
this is maybe less to do with
incentivizing users to go to choose one
or the over the other or or the
implementation details of how easy it's
going to be for consumers to you know to
access this data but
I think you know this unified
interface where the only difference
between a temp and recoverable storage
type
if I'm understanding this correctly it
will lead to you know whether it's
restorable or not from the arc whether
it's put in the archive or not when it
times out I think that's going to lead
to a better developer experience and
lead to develops making better decisions
about which to use because we're
simplifying the decision process
you know by by making that the only
difference functionally about what
happens with the data
you know we're just making the
decision process so much simpler for
them because a developer just needs to
answer the question do I need this to go
to the archive or not
and if they can they answer that with
you know yes or no and then they make
the decision and they move on when these
storage types contain other differences
you know suddenly developers have got
like this Matrix of features and
attributes that they're needing to
decide between and you know that that
can really lead to more complex
thinking more  you know maybe making
thinking more you know maybe making
the wrong decision because somebody
thought they needed this this feature
from a recoverable type but but they
didn't really need it so
yeah I think I think this is good
yeah I think I'm kind of like what I'm
envisioning is the end story to be is
that we just have a unified storage
class  I think a previous proposal so
class I think a previous proposal so
we have to separate you know temporary
and restorable storage classes but this
would have a single storage class and
when you create an entry
you know there's three parameters you
specify the key you specify the lifetime
a short meeting long  this is the
a short meeting long this is the
initial Lifetime and then you specify
the type the type Vision temporary or
you can get used to intercepts change
but temporary
like a recreatable and unique or
something like that I think just having
that single story is  is a
that single story is is a
significantly better experience but I
think we can talk more to this
I think what we're doing is we're
narrowing the decision like the decision
tree that somebody needs to go through
like were you basically saying to them
you just need to decide
so what that type is and it has it
has like a much narrow impact on on what
the result is
Lee were you arguing for or against
I'm arguing for it if I I suspect maybe
I'm misunderstanding something with your
question timer
maybe I can just try to make sure I
understand what you're saying Garen so
the only difference that the selecting
that type is gonna going to like
all of these types are going to have
support TTL is that right
well so under the hood  there's not
well so under the hood there's not
a real TTL
essentially there's a rent balance
which is detected from
but the way we have to do this
because run fees variable
so the actual interface will be like
you have like a rent balance of xlm
that's deducted from from a variable
rent fee but the interface exposed is on
ledgers so  essentially everything
ledgers so essentially everything
will have a TTL now you have you can
have guarantees at creation time so the
reason why we picked you know 15 minutes
seven days and 30 days as our
creation times is because 30 days is the
maximal amount that we can guarantee
past that there's no guarantees because
the rental fee can change but having
those I think three initial values is
guarantees now I think 30 days plenty of
days to create the entry and then if you
decide that you want to last for like
six years then you can do like a manual
then bump that and so I think those
those starting values are reasonable
stuff in the chat if you want to talk
about the Oracle issue
yeah it's I'm still talking about what I
said before which is  I think the
said before which is I think the
yeah like you know let's be clear about
this the main reason  we're we're
this the main reason we're we're
working on temporary storage is because
we've had discussions  internal
we've had discussions internal
discussions with some of the like the
big Oracle projects out there and this
is something that they've expressed a
Desiring
and I think that we're now trying to
generalize for things but
I think specifically the Autobahn
doesn't really sit well with me for for
Oracle data  because
Oracle data because
the Oracle will probably limit the the
amount of  time something is relevant
amount of time something is relevant
for artificially if it's if they can't
do that within the storage  parameters
do that within the storage parameters
and then effectively people are going
to like  you're like bumping an entry
to like you're like bumping an entry
into Oblivion like you know like I'm
accessing  at 4 pm a value that should
accessing at 4 pm a value that should
be dead by 5 PM and that's enforced by
the contract so people like keep
enforcing it
to theoretically live it you know six or
seven PM but at 5 PM the the access is
cut
so  it's like it's like bumping to
so it's like it's like bumping to
nowhere and that's and that seems to be
what we want to do
so I guess there's two solutions I see
of this first off like the contract can
just you know be smart about this and
say if you access this entry and it's
past its expiration date delete entry
so you don't bump into Oblivion
also from just a a practicality
standpoint we do Define a maximum rent
balance for automatic bumps to avoid
issues like this where like an entry is
used frequently initially and then never
used again so it has like this
essentially infinite balance that never
runs out of so there is a maximum  so
runs out of so there is a maximum so
you can't bump it into Oblivion one
possible solution is I think for  you
possible solution is I think for you
know medium and long term
you know lifetimes that's like the
the lifetime measured in days and weeks
then I think our Mac bombs make sense
but we could also  just special case
but we could also just special case
the short-term life  this is like the
the short-term life this is like the
one hour life frame time and just saying
hey one hour lifetimes it's supposed to
be super ephemeral this doesn't get
automatic bumps but the other types do I
think that's going to be  fine from a
think that's going to be fine from a
developer standpoint because we already
have to special case on the short
lifetime because just doing the win
bucket list is structured  restorable
bucket list is structured restorable
entry types
can't live.short they must live at
least to the medium Lifetime and so we
already throw an error if you have like
a short Lifetime with a  you know
a short Lifetime with a you know
again we have to figure out the SDK but
essentially  you know restorable entry
essentially you know restorable entry
types can have a short Lifetime and so I
think it would be reasonable to have
almost unified interface
and still have you  temporary
and still have you temporary
entries with medium long terms Autobahn
they just have like the very very short
term not out of bump
tone with this satisfies your Oracle
taste
maybe I'm just concerned about having
like
yeah different exceptions and rules
based on you know things like
like the lifetime
of a ledger entry  yeah you think
of a ledger entry yeah you think
about it some more
well I think I think what we I think the
protocol
should
because the way the vocalists are
structured it's very negative
for performance if the protocol
enables a specific boundaries and so I
think if we just essentially build into
the protocol that there are boundaries
but they're fuzzy boundaries
and if the oracles can accept that I
think that's a significantly better
compromise so it might not be exactly
what the oracles were imagining but if
we can get close enough
and unify the interface and not
distort Downstream systems I would be
heavily in favor of that
or you're describing Aaron that that
fuzzy boundary that's just if folks want
to use the fuzzy band like
that feature of the system can still
code logic into a contract such that
a ledger entry stores value that's
that's a more granular TTL if they
really need that right
correct yes so there's there's nothing
stopping someone from building something
that's less we're just basically saying
you know if you can exploit this
capability of the system  you don't
capability of the system you don't
have to write so much code your contract
will probably a little bit more
efficient Etc
yeah and the biggest thing is also fees
because this is like way cheaper like
the short like a temporary entry within
a short lifetime will be like way way
cheaper than all the other storage types
and so from a financial perspective you
know even if the oracles have to do like
this like check the TTL automatic
deletion it's still significantly
cheaper than using any other storage
type for this use case
just to answer some questions in the
chat
regarding archival performance the
way we're structuring the archival
process this is in particular I think
stellar starseed and some others have
been talking about
the waiver structure the archival
process is that
archiving is done very lazily
on ethics
so we only archive a very small
amount of entries every 30 minutes to
one hour and also
you know expiration are kind of thing
is done
on bucket list merge boundaries and
so  while this you know system
so while this you know system
you know the implementation is
somehow complex and not simple it's been
specifically designed to be low load
upon both validators and boundaries
Downstream systems also one small
clarification point
this is probably poor ordering on my
part I apologize we've been throwing
around terms like archiver the type of
archive we're talking about here
we should really like  read like
we should really like read like
this is kind of rename the state
expiration but we still use kind of
outdated terminology this has nothing to
do with the current Archive of the
Stellar Network this will be a separate
service
perhaps we'll say like  no this is
perhaps we'll say like no this is
not validator archive I apologize this
is a new type of  you know node
is a new type of you know node
perhaps a better terminology would be
deep state store and so  you know meta
deep state store and so you know meta
is emitted  one  you know entries
is emitted one you know entries
expire if it's temporary entry it's just
drops and deleted if it's a restorable
entry then it's delete from the bucket
list but the meta is exhibit okay what
is node thank you toner excellent the
hardest part of computer science name
and stuff
and so whenever  the restorable
and so whenever the restorable
entry it gets deleted from The Bucket
List delete from a validator and then is
sent to the witness node and the witness
stores it in like a goal-like data
structure and then essentially whenever
you need to restore something from a
witness node
you just  submit a bid
you just submit a bid
on the Chain
with like essentially like how much
you're willing to pay for the
restoration and then the witness node
then services that
that request and whoever services at
first gets the reward so essentially the
way this is working is it's  you know
way this is working is it's you know
optimized for Downstream system
specifically
and it's not the  archiver it's not
and it's not the archiver it's not
valid or archivers but rather it's this
new witness node type
and the witness node type has a
financial incentive to run and
structured kind of similarly to bitcoin
miners in a way
instead of you know it's not proof of
course they're actually doing useful
work
by storing and then producing these
proofs if that makes sense
yeah my apologies for the overload terms
okay it does seem like there is
like consensus around the unified
kind of like storage interface
and to some extent I think having a
unified storage interface  trumps
unified storage interface trumps
you know having
kind of like super specialized
Behavior
so I'm kind of coming around to that
and I think that if no one else has any
comments of the matter  if you could
comments of the matter if you could
just like formalize this and dump it in
the store Bond Dev Channel later  that
the store Bond Dev Channel later that
would be great
does anyone else have any more
comments in this specific topic
I will take that as a no
on a silence to answer your question
we have a cap-like document
it was shared at the beginning of
this chat
it's called Web proposal  temporary
it's called Web proposal temporary
or a state or it's temporary entry to
expiration is the title
and right now it's outdated because
it's still the TTL version
but I will be updating this
throughout the day  with what we
throughout the day with what we
talked about in the evenified interface
and so the temporary storage proposal
document is the one to watch
and that will be updated with this
new results  to formalize this
new results to formalize this
okay sounds good I see that Dima has
been trying to say something  medima
been trying to say something medima
you are muted right now
now you are not muted
and we still cannot hear you so this
sounds
Discord
the same one he's typed yeah so
the storage access interface
so creating an entry versus
malfighting entry so right now
we have just an overload set function
which both modifies and creates an
entry under this proposal I would like
to see that change so that we have an
explicit create function an explicit
modification function that are separate
and so essentially what I've created
would do is create is when you specify
your key  your lifetime and your type
your key your lifetime and your type
and then
what are the expectations for red
bumps and so  rent is bumped on every
bumps and so rent is bumped on every
access so this is both read and write
accesses the internet bump is on the
hook and required
and it's Universal and so what we're
going to do is we're going to pick some
small rooms of ledgers say 5 to 10
ledgers and then for every entry that
you read or write
you will be charged for logging that
entry five five or ten ledgers the
thinking being is that your model this
values be very low and so transaction
fees are still low
the thinking maybe that you know if a
contract like such as usdc or something
major like that is used often
the lumens is essentially abstracted
away because you have these automatic
Grant bumps and small incremental bumps
that add up and so that's how it works
everything that you read or write will
incur a small bump
and we've you know optimized  the
and we've you know optimized the
systems level such that
even though you're doing a bump lead
only entries are still essentially only
read only you do have to do a small
right because of the bottom
that the entry you're writing is very
small you don't need them trying to
optimize as much as possible now in
addition to the automatic bumps you can
do an explicit
you know  pump via an operation and
you know pump via an operation and
in this what you do is in one detail I
mentioned earlier with the online Grant
bumps before I move on is that there's
also the ceiling such that you can't
you know say like  I mean just your
you know say like I mean just your
own number here say like one user worth
of rent
when I say like one year worth of 10
letters worth
this is an estimation based off of
the current  Revenue the current one
the current Revenue the current one
fee is variable and so that estimation
maybe overestimation or underestimation
level run fee each doesn't change
super fast and so the estimation is good
enough for us and so essentially you
have a ceiling I'm saying it's like one
year or six months or something like
that such that if the rent balance is at
or above that ceiling
then on an overhead bumps on the
background bumps and you're not charged
for the online recording love fee if
it's at the ceiling now in addition to
the small  required and automatic
the small required and automatic
randoms there's also a  operation that
randoms there's also a operation that
allows you to put as much rent as you
want into the entry
which is called manually and so if
you have a particular King that you're
interested in
Beyond just the on top right bumps an
example of this would be a balance that
you want to keep live on The Ledger even
if you don't use it very often then you
can call this operation and buy an
auditory amount so you can put you know
a ton of X11 there and have your entry
exist almost indefinitely if you want to
but that's essentially how the event
interface works with regards to the
temporary Almanac versus manual rent
bumps
drop in the chat
so
first new eventually Set  yeah so if
first new eventually Set yeah so if
you want to reset the room then you can
delete and create
but outstanding rent balance is
burned currently  the reason for
burned currently the reason for
burning we talked about a little while
ago but essentially it can be gamed if
you refund red balance
and so if you have and have setting
right balance when an entry is deleted
you don't get it back so that's one
disadvantage to this quote-unquote reset
the dean wants to answer your question I
don't think there's ever a motivation
for a rent reset like you know if you're
going to delete and create the entry
just modify the entry with your new
value and keep the the red ponds it's
already there so we don't really know
what you're talking about when you say
run reset  but yes it is possible you
run reset but yes it is possible you
just don't get your funds back
I was said to answer your question
yeah yes so since those are how we
have not included explicit run bumps
are not currently  contract defined
are not currently contract defined
because that also opens the door for
briefing and Luscious uses if a contract
defines like a super super large rent
bottle
like an insane fee
and so because of that  contracts
and so because of that contracts
do not Define red bumps the only way to
Bob Reynolds is via an operation where
you specify the key
so contracts  have new mechanism to
so contracts have new mechanism to
Bob rent now there is a proposal
called ice box or auxiliary about
bump
that means what exposed to Smart
contracts
if there are no other pressing issues
we can talk about that  that is on the
we can talk about that that is on the
topic today but it's not super ambient
if we have bigger fish to fry
I know there's also been some discussion
around
transaction metas and results
and whether or not their hashes get
included
is that something that you want to
talk now what's  more important or
talk now what's more important or
what's more origin this or
garen's topic
I I think Aaron's topic is more
important than my like I might I think
my thing will take I can describe in
like 30 seconds and I don't think we'd
discuss it much but we can continue with
this topic and spend maybe the last five
minutes
on The Meta issue I'm not scared you're
done
and then we can talk about Oxford thumbs
yeah I'll save the last five minutes
for you
that's good
yeah so I guess  to explain the issue
yeah so I guess to explain the issue
so currently we have like this post one
or this  this operation that bumps
or this this operation that bumps
around explicitly and this automatic and
Pleasant Run bump but there is no way
for a smart contract to define a ramp up
action
the reason for this twofold first
we want to maintain parallelism and so
one like kind of like what you would
think  if a contract could Define run
think if a contract could Define run
bumps
an expected interface would be
let's say you have a value or you have
an entry you checked your current rent
balance of that entry and if the rent
balance is below some value then you
bump it now the issue with this is it
destroys our data dependency graph if
you allow these conditional rent bumps
conditional thing you check the
current balance and only bump if it's
below some threshold the reasoning for
this is because
entries in both the read and read
write sets are receiving this automatic
bump
you essentially have this dependency on
literally every entry in every
transaction
or in like a every transaction that
touches the same smart contract if you
allow conditional bumps because even if
an entry is in the read-only set
if it's  you know because of the
if it's you know because of the
automatic bumps
the rent aspect of that entry is
implicitly turned into a reap right and
so conditional red bumps destroy
parallelism so we don't want to allow
that there are some potential ways we
can fix it or do like  rent charges in
can fix it or do like rent charges in
different stages of application but it
gets complicated really fast and so
conditional rent bumps at least from
version one or out of the picture
now  a possible second version
now a possible second version
is to allow green bumps
but not conditionally and so we would
not expose the rent balance to the
contract but would allow a contract to
define a rent bump
the issue with this is it opens the door
for either malicious griefing or just
accidental  briefing by a bugs so for
accidental briefing by a bugs so for
instance it would be a poor user
interface if a button a smart contract
caused someone to pay 10 years worth of
rent on an entry that would be worthless
in two days right
it's just open store to a large
amount of bugs it also allows the
contract to kind of like Define
arbitrary fees
which I'm not sure there's something
we want to do it's also not super useful
if you can't conditionally check
so it doesn't seem like a great use
case because it would be probably a bad
idea to  for a contract to Define
idea to for a contract to Define
behavior that every time you save you
balance of that balance by six months or
something
if you can't shift around balance
because you can have very very high
levels of rent balance
and secondly
it's not very clear
if you should do an explicit run bump
so for instance say you have like a
token contract that has to be balanced
it might see on paper that in efficient
implementation is to check the rent
balance and say okay we want this huge
balance to always have six months of
rent and so on every call of imbalance
we check the balance or we check the
limit balance of the balance entry and
then if it's blowing six months we bump
it now that works well if the owner of
that token balance is calling view
balance however if a different user say
a user wants  to charge that user some
a user wants to charge that user some
amount and they call view balances to
check to see how many coins that person
has and they get charged rims that seems
inappropriate and so it seems to be very
difficult for contracts to Define
situations or they actually should
charge additional rent to the user
because it's not always clear if the
invoker is the owner of the entries
being accessed or has an interest a
vested interest and these entries remain
live on the ledger so those are kind of
the reasons why so far we haven't
defined rent bump functions that are
exposed to the host contractors over to
the smart contracts so that being said
there is one potential idea that we've
been floating around called auxiliary
round bumps
and there's a section of that
describes this
on the second talk I shared which is
the rent proposal a CDS version doc
on the section called box rent on
post function so what this is is
essentially
you can Define this function called
ox and bump and it takes a single
parameter which is the key and contracts
can Define this and put it arbitrarily
and bump arbitrary Keys now the trick is
the contract can't Define how much to
buy the rent by and so all they can say
is this entry should be bumped but they
don't say it by how much and then  and
don't say it by how much and then and
the footprint of the transaction you
would have an auxiliary Run pump value
that the user can set to whatever they
want and so for instance if I'm calling
view balance on a token contract and it
is in fact my own balance that I own I
can set my auxiliary run bump to six
months in the host function which means
that anytime the smart contract calls
logs ramp bump
that entry would be bumped by six
months but if I'm calling the balance on
another user's token balance I don't
care about then instead of setting you
know odds to rent to six months I could
set it to zero and so every call to aux
rent bump would be a no-op because I
don't want to pay an additional rent
the advantage of the situation is that
while there is a manual function
to bump rent you need to specify the
keys and it's a difficult issue because
the contract developers know what keys
belong to a user but the user knows
their use case for how much bump or that
they want to bump so if you can imagine
a smart contract might have you know
three different types of data associated
with a single user so for instance a
token contract might have both a balance
tied to a user's account that has one
key and then say a nonce with a
different key that's also type of user
and so to be able to properly use my
balance I need both entries to be live
now if I'm not you know very
sophisticated or I haven't read the
contract code in depth
I may I even believe that I only need
to bump my balance entry and so I'll
find my balance entry key do my host
I'll put six months in there but if I
don't want my Notch value then it
doesn't matter because the knots will be
sent to the archive it's impossible and
so it seems reasonable for the contract
to Define essentially groups of keys
that belong to a user and this aux rep
bump function allows contracts to do
that
essentially what you would do is the
contract would call Ox rent bump both on
my token balance entry as well as my
token non-century and so then when I
call that function I'll have to specify
specify one value aux rent bump six
months and then both entries are
properly bumped and so this is kind of
an interface such that the contract
developers can Define which groups of
keys are bumped and then the caller
defines how much those groups are bumped
by
now the issue is I'm not sure how useful
this would be in practice and also seems
a little complicated and so I guess this
the the question here is do we want to
allow smart contracts to Define Rebels
at all and if we do if it is a strong
requirement that they'd be able to
Define bumps  is this aux rent bump
Define bumps is this aux rent bump
workable or do we need to think about a
little bit more and figure out a simpler
maybe easier solution
do we actually need that to be in the
protocol I I think if we like I thought
last time we discussed having like a
self-like
you know basically like people
standardized on a
maybe a method or something that you
know you would
increment
as a yeah as I said right that basically
tells you a bunch of hints like that and
then
only maybe like incorporate this type of
functionality into the protocol if there
is like
something that ends up
you know working for the majority of
people I feel like we are trying to dig
something at the low level
and set it all specific here
I think there's like the the motivation
for this is a bit problematic because
we're saying
you know like calling manually the
the the rent bump operation might be
kind of like more complex but at the end
of the day neither of these are actually
going to be performed by the by the
users themselves right this is going to
be managed by the wallet the user
doesn't necessarily understand the
difference or care about the difference
and from that perspective these two
don't sound
it doesn't sound like enough
like we gain enough to  to
like we gain enough to to
justify The increased complexity here
yeah that sounds reasonable to me I was
in super strong at this point  so just
in super strong at this point so just
to finalize this and I'll let  Sid
to finalize this and I'll let Sid
talk for a bit
so are we good with moving forward on
rent
with automatic rent bumps and then
manual run bumps via this operation are
we good with that
it sounds like some people are
discussing
a host function where you provide keys
to bump
did we decide on doing that like in
contracts you you would provide like a
list of keys to get bumped but not the
not the amount
well that's what I was discussing this
is what the box front bump is redefine
the set of keys to button but not the
amount to button and then the amount
would be specified in the footprint
it's a complex and kind of Niche
Solutions so maybe it's not really
required
okay
you can move on to  the event proofs
nope let's do it
Okay so
we initially decided to include so
right now the  sorbine events exist in
right now the sorbine events exist in
the transaction meta and transaction
meta V3  and The Meta is not included
meta V3 and The Meta is not included
in the Ledger it's not hashed anywhere
so we and initially we said we would
hash the  the components of the meta
hash the the components of the meta
most importantly the events and include
this hash somewhere somewhere in the
ledger so initially it was going to be
in transaction result
in a new transaction result but this
would have caused
a lot of Downstream issues and we
decided instead to move it into the
Ledger header but more recently  after
Ledger header but more recently after
discussing with Nico we decided to just
not not hash it anywhere and just
include in the meta and
which is which you know we should be
fine for now and if we need some way to
add proofs for events we can add it on
later instead of you know doing putting
in a solution now that may not be
sufficient
now  we haven't discussed this much so
now we haven't discussed this much so
this is an opportunity for anyone  to
this is an opportunity for anyone to
provide any concerns with this with
this process
if there are no concerns then  we can
if there are no concerns then we can
go ahead I mean I'm I'm very slightly
concerned that
something we were recording we're going
to be not recording
in some ways it gives us you know more
wiggle room in the in that we're not
you know we can we can do replay without
reproducing the exact same events as
last time
but it also means that if we do replay
and we and we completely break events
for example  we won't notice that fact
for example we won't notice that fact
so there's a sort of
error checking aspect to recording
things that is being given up here right
but that yeah that is a good point
like events events events don't go into
blender and so if the it's some sort of
a question of whether the events that
are emitted by a contract are considered
a canonical part of the contracts
interaction with the world or or an
incidental detail that you know we can
we can just feel free to break or
whatever
yeah I don't think we would want to
break obviously obviously we don't want
to break it but yeah so I mean if it's
if this is a validation question you
know on our end we like you know before
before we add any type of anything
related to this we could just add some
validation right where we make sure the
meta doesn't change
which which we might do already right
we do that already we do that already
yeah so so if there's if there's any any
unit test that does
event emitting in star core that'll
that'll get caught up there because we
just record them better directly but
yeah so I mean from that perspective I I
think we should be fine and you know the
bigger reason to not do this was
even though we you know in the old
proposal we had a way to calculate to
like verify cryptographically verify
that the event was in a ledger but the
process was very complex and
realistically I don't think anyone would
be doing it anytime soon right
so it made sense to
yeah I'm I think I'm
I'm less
there's so yeah there's two completely
different use cases for this one of them
is is like
brief basically you know so
someone someone wants to argue that hey
I I saw this event and and  you claim
I I saw this event and and you claim
it didn't happen and I'm gonna go prove
that it did happen
the other is sort of consensus and
integrity like does does the record
Force us into
replaying something precisely or not and
I can see that being both both a
blessing and a curse we we've actually
spent a lot of time trying to subdivide
things that we want to be recorded
precisely versus things that we don't
want to be like we want like diagnostic
events and and you know print statements
and all this other kind of stuff that
the user can can just sort of sprinkle
in willy-nilly and that the operators
can bring along and and us as core
developers can put in without becoming
canonical and so we've had this whole
question of subdividing things to
canonical or non-canonical in the event
stream now here you're just saying let's
just make basically we'll make the
entire event stream non-canonical right
like it yeah
it's it's nice it's nice if we keep it
the same from one from One release to
the next but it's not actually part of
The Ledger and part of me is okay with
that
everyone who has thought about using
events for sort of canonical reference
purposes feels okay with that because it
seems like a big change to me but it's
it's one that I can live with certainly
it makes life easier in many ways for us
do you guys hear me
yeah
yeah like the thing that Britain yeah
you brought up I I think it's something
that I
yeah I was not really thinking about
that's actually
product so like for the verification is
through the
yeah like  which is the thing I was
yeah like which is the thing I was
like thinking about when I said hey
let's remove this
it doesn't we don't really care I think
for the
being able to replay historical data
you know with High Fidelity this is
the only signal we can get
and if we don't include it anywhere
we're going to not be able to guarantee
that and
until we have  you know
until we have you know
effect coverage in the absorband in the
actual code base for how we produce
those events that I I don't feel very
good actually
about not having this anywhere
so maybe we should actually go back to
make
put this maybe it's just the advantage
or something in the
in the transaction result which was kind
of the  info server I mean now that
of the info server I mean now that
we're actually back to only one
one operation basically for Servant
transactions maybe this is not so bad
are you saying
using the transaction result of The
Ledger header
no not to use The Ledger header it would
be not a normal  result  for server
be not a normal result for server
for the soroban invoke
what's the name of that idea
yeah
and just have that there and it's we get
it for free basically
oh in the result in the result yeah it's
including the hash because that that's
actually the thing I'm really worried
about here is that I'm not sure we can
guarantee that we'll have
that the test coverage will be that good
okay so
thank you
sir go ahead yes for historical replay I
think that's the thing I'm really
worried about is that we break events
basically
for
for older managers and we won't know
this
okay
because this is related to another
issue we need to deal with which is that
in low cost function up right now
Returns the SC value  which will
Returns the SC value which will
actually be a like a vector of SC
dollars we moved to multi-invoke so that
should be moved to the meta as well and
all that can be hashed events and the
return value can be hashed and included
in the in low post-op result that's what
you're saying right
so I thought what we said what the the
this result should actually become a
system event
right
yeah I'm not sure we haven't discussed
like the I guess the format is still up
for debate but yeah
yeah the SC value is actually  so the
yeah the SC value is actually so the
actual result that you create of the
operation
should be a hash
that points to Mira that was emitted
basically right and then the meta would
include a bunch of hashes the result so
I mean or events sorry
and potentially we can include the
The Ledger changes as well there
okay
yeah so that was kind of the original
plan I guess but maybe a slightly
different now because
yeah since then we moved the SC value
results to the events
as an event to be an event yeah well
just to be clear that hasn't happened
yet but  but we should yeah all those
yet but but we should yeah all those
changes make sense together yeah yeah
yeah
okay
I think yeah I think I can update
we have some issues and PR's open for
this so I'll go and update them  and
this so I'll go and update them and
this makes sense
yeah
because that we were completely blind on
this one
so we are so we are going to wind up
having basically the just just just a
Fidelity check of like a hash for
identity yeah
so that we have a way to to guarantee
that we are not breaking historical
replays I mean it also forces us to
maintain Fidelity right which means that
we yeah exactly accidentally emitting an
event we're going to have backwards
compatibility code that we have to jam
in there that
might get annoying
I just wanted I just wanted to bring it
up but not I'm not
I don't feel
okay well
I'm happy either way I guess anyway I
just I just want to make sure we or saw
these there
sorry the end at the end of State we're
we're talking about is so it sounds like
we are going to include the hash in the
in the co-stop result of of all the
results
and events because the events and the
results do the same thing now results
yeah okay yeah
all right
and that winds up in the header but we
don't but we're not going to have that
sort of monstrous reproduction of
transaction result V2 and no no okay
so it's a sort of a mini addition to the
Ledger header that
but we don't have to change the letter
editor at all right if we just change
the invoke host of function up result oh
so this so the result
director is got the half now
that's what it sounds like yeah yeah
because the other way would be making a
result translation result D2 which would
be annoying that would be it yeah yeah
or or transaction meta V2 like you've
gone through several iterations with
this right there's a version where you
where you Fork transaction result
there's a version where you're forked
contacted meta
yeah we need a new meta but  I don't
yeah we need a new meta but I don't
think we need a new result new
transaction result do we actually need a
new meta if we have
if we're just taking this in the up
result you still need to put the events
and the results like the events of the
matter right
like you know we have we have a
transaction meta V3 struct
I thought
oh you oh you need that in order for the
events to actually just go somewhere
like for it's for yeah actually
extract them okay so but you're not but
you're not going to hatch that meta no
no but you are going to have those
events into the transaction result yeah
okay so the events wind up in two
different places they wind up they're
full their full content wind up in the
in the Met of e3 so that Horizon can
read it and their hashes wind up
incorporated into the transaction result
which is just a normal transaction
result yeah
okay yeah I can live with that for sure
right
okay we are
after time  any final words from
after time any final words from
anyone
okay let's keep the discussion going
in  Discord thank you all for joining
in Discord thank you all for joining
have a great rest of your day